Title: MAZE: Solving "the World's Most Challenging Puzzle" with Python
Date: 2019-09-01
Slug: maze
Summary: Applying graph analysis to a beloved book from childhood
Status: draft

When I was a kid I had a unique and interesting book called *[MAZE:
Solve the World's Most Challenging
Puzzle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MAZE:_Solve_the_World%27s_Most_Challenging_Puzzle)*. It's
structure is nonlinearâ€”sort of like the choose-your-own-adventure
books that were also popular at the time. Each page of the book has an
illustration depicting a room in the titular maze, and containing
numbered doors that you can use to go to other rooms/pages. For
instance, here's room 1:

![MAZE room 1](/assets/images/maze-room-1.jpg)

To take the door to room 20, you simply turn to page 20. By doing this
repeatedly, you "navigate" through the maze.

The goal is to find your way from room 1 to the room at the center of
the maze (room 45) and back in only sixteen steps. Then, once you've
done that, solve the riddle hidden in the illustration of room 45,
using the clues hidden along in the path there and back.

In addition to the central puzzle, the eerie, painstakingly crafted
woodcut illustrations and sparse but evocative descriptions of each
room are also delightful in their own right. The book is full of
furtive clues, mysterious symbolism, allusions to fables and
fairytales, and gothic architecture. Reading (playing?) it feels like
stepping into a Hans Christian Anderson story, or a Guillermo del Toro
movie.

My childhood copy had long since gone missing, when a couple of very
kind friends got me another after I mentioned how much I adored it. I
never solved
